Hello everybody and welcome to another walkthrough and this time we're going to do some walkthrough in the CDC 6504 machine language emulator.
So let's first just talk a little bit about all the things that we can do here.
So this is kind of our machine language emulator.
We have a series of instructions.
It starts out all zeros.
We have data memory.
We have 256 instructions.
We have 256 data memories.
We have an accumulator register, an X register, and a Y register taken from the 6502.
And then we have the program counter, which points to where we're at.
Our program counter currently says zero, pointing at instruction memory zero.
The Z is a flag that once we do a calculation or store some stuff and the result of that is a zero, the Z will check and N stands for negative.
We can branch if negative, branch if positive, branch of zero.
And so these are used to do a pattern of compare, then branch.
We can load a program from here.
Let's just load a simple sample so you can see it.
You can also view the assembly language.
And so what I'll tend to do is I'll tend to put the assembly language over here.
And I've got this narrate execution.
You can hover over each of the memory locations and it tells you, for example, that this 0x00 location is a E2 in hex and it is a clear instruction.
Now, sometimes this is instruction and sometimes it's data when we're doing load immediates.
It tells you, you know, if it's ASCII, it'll tell you what the ASCII character is.
And so it has to interpret this.
But this is just zeros and ones in the computer memory and it's contextualized what's going on.
So this is just a clear instruction, an increment instruction and an increment instruction.
And then a break, which is just a zero, which stops the thing from running.
And we can see the same thing right here in the assemblies.
Clear, increment, increment, break.
Eventually, we're going to want to just look at the assembly.
It just makes our lives a lot simpler to watch what's going on.
But reality, it's zeros and ones.
And so we have a couple of options here.
We can start the application.
We can run it a single step.
We can reset it, but that clears everything and we've got to load a new program.
But we have this cool feature called narrate execution, and it slows it down and describes everything that's going on.
And so I'm going to tell you in advance what's going to happen.
It's going to clear the X register and you've got to watch the X register here.
And it's going to add one to the X register, watch the X register, and then add one again to the X register.
And when it's all said and done, it'll stop and nothing else will have changed except the X register will have a two in it.
So I'm going to move this over here and you can kind of watch as the program counter moves along and just kind of that assembly is there for you to remember.
Later, you can write assembly and get it assembled.
So let me go ahead, it's got narrate execution turned on and let me start it.
PC zero X zero zero clear X register PC zero X zero one increment X register PC zero X zero two increment X register PC zero X zero three break no printed output.
OK, so you saw what happened there.
Let me go and do this a little more slowly.
Let me reload it, load simple sample.
And I'm going to instead when we narrate execution, I'm going to hit step.
So you saw it run automatically.
And so I'm going to do step.
It's going to run one instruction and narrate it when I press step PC zero X zero zero clear X register.
OK, so notice that the Z flag, it's a one byte instruction.
So the PC went up by one.
The Z flag is now set.
It's not a negative number because the X register is a zero, which is not negative.
And that is the result of that particular instruction.
So let's step again PC zero X zero one increment X register.
So we incremented X.
So if we look at X, X is now gone from zero to one.
The program counters ready for the next instruction.
But because X is now one, neither the Z nor the N flag is set.
So let's step one more time PC zero X zero two increment X register.
OK, so now the next instruction is going to be zero X zero three and the X register is two.
The Z and the N flags are set accordingly.
When we step again, we're going to hit this break, which is a stop.
And then the program executions zero X zero three break no printed output.
And what it's talking about no printed output is in future ones.
We put some data when we put data in here.
The printed output comes out of the first few up to a zero byte in the memory.
But this one has no particular memory.
OK, so let's just take a look at a couple of other things that we have.
It has a bunch of documentation.
It's pretty cool.
It's probably more you can read this.
I can read this.
It's pretty cool.
That's just a URL that you can go paste into AI if you want.
And you can ask AI for help writing this code.
And we'll see how well AI does with this.
But it has documentation.
We also need an ASCII chart, right?
This is not a text one.
So but we have a little ASCII chart.
That tells it the space is 32 decimal.
It's 20 hex and zero zero one zero zero.
And remember that hex you can do a four bit to one column hex to binary conversion.
And for me, I start seeing things like I'll look at like this one here.
I know that's a seven.
So that's twenty seven.
I'll see this one one one and I'll see that as an F.
So you'll start to see hopefully after a while, you'll kind of have a hex to binary conversion in your mind.
Decimal is a pain in the neck.
I just got a hand convert both decimal to hex and binary.
And so that's pretty much all of the features of the application.
And so next, we're going to go through some of these things in a little bit more detail.
And so come to those in a bit.